.\" mintty man page
.\"
.\" This 'man' page is Copyright 2009 Lee D. Rothstein, 2009-10 Andy Koppe
.\"
.\" You may distribute, use, and modify this man page under the terms
.\" of the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), Version 1.3,
.\" 3 November 2008 (or later) as specified.
.TH mintty 1 2010-12-28 mintty\ 0.9.5

.ad l

.SH NAME

mintty - Cygwin terminal emulator


.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBmintty\fP [\fIOPTION\fP]... [ \fB-\fP | \fIPROGRAM\fP [\fIARG\fP]... ]


.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBMintty\fP is a terminal emulator for Cygwin with a native Windows user
interface and minimalist design.
Its terminal emulation is largely compatible with \fBxterm\fP, but it does not
require an X server.


.SH INVOCATION

If a program name is supplied on the command line, this is executed with any
additional arguments given.
Otherwise, mintty looks for a shell to execute in the \fISHELL\fP environment
variable.
If that is not set, it reads the user's default shell setting from
\fI/etc/passwd\fP.
As a last resort, it falls back to \fI/bin/sh\fP.
If a single dash is specified instead of a program name, the shell is invoked
as a login shell.


.SH OPTIONS

The standard GNU option formats are accepted, with single dashes
introducing short options and double dashes introducing long options.

.TP
\fB-e\fP, \fB--exec\fP \fIPROGRAM\fP [\fIARG\fP ...]
Execute the specified program in the terminal session and pass on any additional
arguments.
This option can be omitted, in which case the first non-option argument, if any,
is taken as the name of the program to execute.

.TP
\fB-p\fP, \fB--position\fP \fIX\fB,\fIY\fR
Open the window with its top left corner at the specified coordinates.

.TP
\fB-s\fP, \fB--size\fP \fICOLS\fB,\fIROWS\fR
Set the initial size of the window in character columns and rows.

.TP
\fB-w\fP, \fB--window\fP \fBnormal\fP|\fBmin\fP|\fBmax\fP|\fBfull\fP
Set the initial window state: normal, minimized, maximized, or full screen.

.TP
\fB-t\fP, \fB--title\fP \fITITLE\fP
Use \fITITLE\fP as the initial window title.
By default, the title is set to the executed command.

.TP
\fB--class\fP \fICLASS\fP
Use \fICLASS\fP as the window class name of the main window.
This allows scripting tools to distinguish different mintty instances.
The default is "mintty".

.TP
\fB-i\fP, \fB--icon\fP \fIFILE\fP[\fB,\fIINDEX\fR]
Load the window icon from an executable, DLL, or icon file.
A comma-separated index can be used to select an icon in a file with multiple
icons.

.TP
\fB-l\fP, \fB--log\fP \fIFILE\fP
Copy all output into the specified log file.
(See also \fIscript\fP(1) for a more flexible logging tool.)

.TP
\fB-u\fP, \fB--utmp\fP
Create a utmp entry.

.TP
\fB-h\fP, \fB--hold\fP \fBnever\fP|\fBalways\fP|\fBerror\fP
Determine whether to keep the terminal window open after the command exits.
The argument can be abbreviated to a single letter.

By default, the window is closed as soon as the child process terminates,
except if it exits with status 255, which is used to indicate failure to
execute the shell command.

Alternatively, the window can be set to never stay open, to always stay open,
or to stay open only if the child process terminates with an error, i.e. with
a non-zero exit code or due to a signal indicating a runtime error.

.TP
\fB-c\fP, \fB--config\fP \fIFILENAME\fP
Read settings from the specified configuration file, in addition to
\fI/etc/minttyrc\fP and \fI~/.minttyrc\fP.

.TP
\fB-o\fP, \fB--option\fP \fINAME\fP=\fIVALUE\fP
Override the named config file option with the given value, e.g.
\fC-o ScrollbackLines=1000\fP.

.TP
\fB-H\fP, \fB--help\fP
Display a brief help message and exit.

.TP
\fB-V\fP, \fB--version\fP
Print version information and exit.


.SH USAGE

Mintty tries to adhere to both Windows and Unix usage conventions.
Where they conflict, an option is usually provided.
This section primarily describes the default configuration;
see the \fBCONFIGURATION\fP section on how it can be customised.


.SS Menus

The context menu can be opened by right-clicking the mouse or by
pressing the \fBMenu\fP key that is normally located next to the right Ctrl key.

Mintty also adds a couple of items to the window menu, which can be accessed 
by clicking on the program icon or pressing \fBAlt+Space\fP.

Both menus have an entry that leads to the options dialog for changing mintty's
configuration.


.SS Copy & paste

Screen contents can be selected by holding down the left mouse button and
dragging the mouse.  If Alt is held down before the left mouse button, a 
rectangular block instead of whole lines will be selected.
The selection can be extended by holding down \fBShift\fP while left-clicking.
Double-clicking or triple-clicking selects a whole word or line, whereby word
selection includes special characters that commonly appear in file names and
URLs.

By default, selected text is automatically copied to the clipboard.
This can be disabled on the \fBMouse\fP page of the options dialog.
Selected text can also be copied manually using either the \fBCopy\fP menu
command, the \fBCtrl+Ins\fP keyboard shortcut, or the middle mouse button
combined with \fBShift\fP. 

The selected region is copied as "rich text" as well as normal text,
which means it can be pasted with colours and formatting into applications
that support it, e.g. word processors.

The window title can be copied using the \fBCopy Title\fP command in the window
menu or the shortcut \fBShift+Ctrl+Ins\fP.

The clipboard contents can be pasted using either the \fBPaste\fP menu command,
the \fBShift+Ins\fP keyboard shortcut, or the middle mouse button.
Not only text but also files and directories can be pasted,
whereby the latter are inserted as Cygwin filenames.
Shell quoting is added to filenames that contain spaces or special characters.


.SS Drag & drop

Text, files and directories can be dropped into the mintty window.
They are inserted in the same way as if they were pasted from the clipboard.


.SS Opening files, directories and URLs

Files, directories and URLs can be opened either by holding \fBCtrl\fP while
left-clicking on them, or by selecting them and choosing the \fBOpen\fP
command from the context menu.
Please note that opening a file or directory with a relative path only works
correctly if the path refers to the current working directory of the process
invoked by mintty.


.SS Font zoom

The font size can be increased or decreased using the keyboard shortcuts
\fBCtrl+plus\fP and \fBCtrl+minus\fP, or by holding \fBCtrl\fP while rolling
the mousewheel.  \fBCtrl+zero\fP returns the font size to the default.


.SS Full screen

Full screen mode can be toggled using either the \fBFull Screen\fP command in
the menu or either of the \fBAlt+Enter\fP and \fBAlt+F11\fP keyboard shortcuts.


.SS Default size

If the window has been resized, it can be returned to the default size set in
the Window pane of the options using the \fBDefault size\fP command in the
menu or the \fBAlt+F10\fP shortcut.


.SS Reset

Sometimes a faulty application or printing a binary file will leave the
terminal in an unusable state. In that case, resetting the terminal's state
via the \fBReset\fP command in the menu or the \fBAlt+F8\fP keyboard shortcut
may help.


.SS Scrolling

Mintty has a scrollback buffer that can hold up to 10000 lines in the default
configuration.
It can be accessed using the scrollbar, the mouse wheel, or the keyboard.
Hold the \fBShift\fP key while pressing the \fBUp\fP and \fBDown\fP arrow keys
to scroll line-by-line or the \fBPageUp\fP and \fBPageDown\fP keys to scroll
page-by-page.


.SS Flip screen

Applications such as editors and file viewers normally use a terminal feature
called the alternate screen, which is a second screen buffer without scrollback.
When they exit, they switch back to the primary screen to restore the command
line as it was before invoking the application.

The \fBFlip Screen\fP menu command and \fBAlt+F12\fP shortcut allow looking
at the primary screen while the alternate screen is active, and vice versa.
For example, this allows to refer to past commands while editing a file.


.SS Switching session

The \fBCtrl+Tab\fP and \fBCtrl+Shift+Tab\fP shortcuts can be used to switch
between mintty windows.  Minimised windows are skipped.


.SS Closing a session

Clicking the window's close button, pressing \fBAlt+F4\fP, or choosing
\fBClose\fP from the window menu sends a \fISIGHUP\fP signal to the process
running in mintty, which normally causes it to exit.

That signal can be ignored, though, in which case the program might have to be
forced to terminate by sending a \fISIGKILL\fP signal instead.
This can be done by holding down \fBShift\fP when using the close button,
shortcut or menu item.


.SS Mouse tracking

When an application activates mouse tracking, mouse events are sent to the
application rather than being treated as window events.
This is indicated by the mouse pointer changing from an \fBI\fP shape to an
arrow.
Holding down \fBShift\fP overrides mouse tracking mode and sends mouse
events to the window instead, so that e.g. text can be selected and the context
menu can be accessed.


.SS Alt codes

The Windows Alt+Numpad method for entering character codes is supported,
whereby the Alt key has to be held while entering the character code.
Only the first key has to be on the numpad; subsequent digits can be entered
both on the numpad or the main part of the keyboard.

If the first key is the \fB'+'\fP on the numpad, the code is interpreted as
hexadecimal, whereby digits A through F can be entered using the letter keys.
If the first key is a zero, the code is interpreted as octal.
If the first key is any other digit from 1 to 9, the code is interpreted as
decimal.

For UTF-8 and other Unicode encodings such as GB18030, the entered code is
interpreted as a Unicode codepoint and encoded accordingly before it is sent.
For other encodings, the entered code is sent as is. If it doesn't fit into one
byte, it is sent as multiple bytes, with the the most significant non-zero byte
first.


.SS Shortcuts

An overview of all the keyboard shortcuts.

.TP
\fBWindow commands\fP

\- \fBAlt+F2\fP: New
.br
\- \fBAlt+F4\fP: Close
.br
\- \fBAlt+F8\fP: Reset
.br
\- \fBAlt+F10\fP: Default size
.br
\- \fBAlt+F11\fP or \fBAlt+Enter\fP: Full screen
.br
\- \fBAlt+F12\fP: Flip screen
.br
\- \fBAlt+Space\fP: Window menu
.br
\- \fBCtrl+Tab\fP: Next window
.br
\- \fBCtrl+Shift+Tab\fP: Previous window


.TP
\fBScrollback\fP

\- \fBShift+Up\fP: Line up
.br
\- \fBShift+Down\fP: Line down
.br
\- \fBShift+PgUp\fP: Page up
.br
\- \fBShift+PgDn\fP: Page down
.br
\- \fBShift+Home\fP: Top
.br
\- \fBShift+End\fP: Bottom

.TP
\fBCopy and paste\fP

\- \fBCtrl+Ins\fP: Copy
.br
\- \fBShift+Ins\fP: Paste

.TP
\fBFont zoom\fP

\- \fBCtrl+plus\fP: Zoom in
.br
\- \fBCtrl+minus\fP: Zoom out
.br
\- \fBCtrl+zero\fP: Back to configured font size


.SH CONFIGURATION

Mintty has a graphical options dialog that can be reached via the context menu
or the window menu.  As usual, both \fBApply\fP and \fBOK\fP apply any changes
made, but \fBOK\fP also closes the dialog.  \fBCancel\fP discards changes.

Settings are stored in INI-style configuration files.  By default, settings are
read from \fI/etc/minttyrc\fP and \fI~/.minttyrc\fP.  Additional config files
can be specified using the \fB--config\fP command line option.  These are read
in order, with settings in later files overriding those in earlier ones.
Configuration changes are saved to the last config file, usually
\fI~/.minttyrc\fP.

The following sections explain the settings on each pane of the options
dialog.
For each setting, its name in the config file is shown in parentheses,
along with its default value, e.g. Columns=80.
For multiple-choice settings, the value representing each choice in the config
file is shown.


.SS Looks
Settings affecting mintty's appearance.

.TP
\fBColours\fP
Clicking on one of the buttons here opens the colour selection dialog.
In the config file, colours are represented as comma-separated RGB triples
with decimal 8-bit values (i.e. ranging from 0 to 255).

\- \fBForeground\fP (ForegroundColour=191,191,191)
.br
\- \fBBackground\fP (BackgroundColour=0,0,0)
.br
\- \fBCursor\fP (CursorColour=191,191,191)

.TP
\fBTransparency\fP (Transparency=0)
Window transparency level, with the following choices:

\- \fBOff\fP (0)
.br
\- \fBLow\fP (1)
.br
\- \fBMedium\fP (2)
.br
\- \fBHigh\fP (3)
.br
\- \fBGlass\fP (-1)

The \fBGlass\fP option is only available on Vista and above with desktop
compositing enabled.
To make this reasonably usable, the glass colour needs to be set to be as dark
as possible in the Windows control panel: choose \fIPersonalize\fP from the
desktop context menu, click on \fIWindow Color\fP, turn the color intensity up
to the maximum, show the color mixer, and turn the brightness down to black.

.TP
\fBOpaque when focused\fP (OpaqueWhenFocused=0)
Enable to make the window opaque when it is active (to avoid background
distractions when working in it).

.TP
\fBCursor\fP (CursorType=2)
The following cursor types are available:

\- \fBBlock\fP (0)
.br
\- \fBUnderscore\fP (1)
.br
\- \fBLine\fP (2)

.TP
\fBCursor blink\fP (CursorBlinks=1)
If enabled, the cursor blinks at the rate set in the Windows Keyboard control
panel.


.SS Text
Settings controlling text display.

.TP
\fBFont selection\fP
Clicking on the \fBSelect\fP button opens a dialog where the font and its
properties can be chosen.
In the config file, this corresponds to the following entries:

\- \fBFont\fP (Font=Lucida Console)
.br
\- \fBStyle\fP (FontIsBold=0)
.br
\- \fBSize\fP (FontHeight=9)

.TP
\fBSmoothing\fP (FontQuality=0)
Select the amount of font smoothing from the following choices:

\- \fBDefault\fP (0): Use Windows setting
.br
\- \fBNone\fP (1): With all the jaggies
.br
\- \fBPartial\fP (2): Greyscale anti-aliasing
.br
\- \fBFull\fP (3): Subpixel anti-aliasing (ClearType)

.TP
\fBShow bold as colour\fP (BoldAsColour=1)
By default, text with the ANSI bold attribute set is displayed with a
different colour, usually with increased brightness.
Alternatively, it can be shown using a bold font, which tends to look better
with black-on-white text.
Additionally, this option controls how the 'half-bright' (or 'dim') text
attribute is displayed: if it is on, half-bright text is
shown with halved foreground colour brightness, otherwise, it is shown
with the foreground colour blended with the background colour.

.TP
\fBAllow blinking\fP (AllowBlinking=0)
ANSI text blinking is diabled by default, on the grounds that blinking
text is a crime against aesthetic decency.

.TP
\fBLocale\fP (Locale=)
The locale setting consists of a lowercase two-letter or three-letter language
code followed by a two-letter country code, for instance \fBen_US\fP or
\fBzh_CN\fP.  The Windows default system and user locales are shown in the
drop-down list for this setting.  Alternatively, the language-neutral "C"
locale can be selected.

If no locale is set here, which is the default, mintty uses the locale and
character set specified via the environment variables \fILC_ALL\fP,
\fILC_CTYPE\fP or \fILANG\fP.

If the locale option is set, however, it will override any environment
variable setting: \fILC_ALL\fP and the \fILC_*\fP variables for specific
locale categories are cleared, while \fILANG\fP is set according to the
selected locale and character set.

.TP
\fBCharacter set\fP (Charset=)
The character set to be used for encoding input and decoding output.
If no locale is set, this setting is ignored.

While changing the character set takes effect immediately for text input and
ouput, it does not affect the processes already running in mintty.
This is because the environment variables of a running process cannot be
changed from outside that process.
Therefore mintty needs to be restarted for a character set change to take full
effect.


.SS Keys
Settings controlling keyboard behaviour.

.TP
\fBCtrl+LeftAlt is AltGr\fP (CtrlAltIsAltGr=0)
The AltGr key on non-US Windows systems is a strange beast: pressing it is
synonymous with pressing the left Ctrl key and the right Alt key at the
same time, and Windows programs usually treat any Ctrl+Alt combination as
AltGr.

Some programs, however, chief among them Microsoft's very own Office, do not
treat Ctrl+LeftAlt as AltGr, so that Ctrl+LeftAlt combinations can be used in
command shortcuts even when a key has an AltGr character binding.

By default, mintty follows Office's approach, because a number of terminal
programs make use of Ctrl+Alt shortcuts.
The "standard" Windows behaviour can be restored by ticking the checkbox here.

The setting makes no difference for keys without AltGr key bindings
(e.g. any key on the standard US layout).

.TP
\fBBackspace sends ^H\fP (BackspaceSendsBS=0)
By default, mintty sends \fB^?\fP as the keycode for the backspace key.
If this option is enabled, \fB^H\fP is sent instead.
This also changes the Ctrl+Backspace code from \fB^_\fP to \fB^?\fP.

.TP
\fBMenu and Full Screen shortcuts\fP (WindowShortcuts=1)
Checkbox for enabling the \fBAlt+Space\fP and \fBAlt+Enter\fP shortcuts.

.TP
\fBSwitch window shortcuts\fP (SwitchShortcuts=1)
Checkbox for enabling the \fBCtrl+Tab\fP and \fBCtrl+Shift+Tab\fP shortcuts
for switching between mintty windows.

.TP
\fBZoom shortcuts\fP (ZoomShortcuts=1)
Checkbox for enabling the font zooming shortcuts \fBCtrl+plus/minus/zero\fP.

.TP
\fBModifier for scrolling\fP (ScrollMod=1)
The modifier key that needs to be pressed together with the arrow up/down,
PgUp/PgDn, or Home/End keys to access the scrollback buffer.
The default is \fBShift\fP.
The \fBOff\fP setting disables scrolling with keyboard shortcuts.

\- \fBShift\fP (1)
.br
\- \fBCtrl\fP (4)
.br
\- \fBAlt\fP (2)
.br
\- \fBOff\fP (0)

.TP
\fBPgUp and PgDn scroll without modifier\fP (PgUpDnScroll=0)
If this is enabled, the scrollback buffer can be accessed by just pressing
PgUp or PgDn, without the 'modifier for scrolling' selected above.
If the modifier is pressed anyway, plain PgUp/PgDn keycodes are sent to the
application.
This option does not affect the arrow keys or Home/End keys.


.SS Mouse
Settings controlling mouse support.

.TP
\fBCopy on select\fP (CopyOnSelect=1)
If enabled, the region selected with the mouse is copied to the clipboard as
soon as the mouse button is released, thus emulating X Window behaviour.

.TP
\fBCopy as rich text\fP (CopyAsRTF=1)
If this option is enabled, which it is by default, text is copied to the
clipboard in rich text format (RTF) in addition to plain text format.
RTF preserves colours and styles when pasting text into applications that
support it, e.g. word processors.

.TP
\fBClicks place command line cursor\fP (ClicksPlaceCursor=0)
If enabled, the command line cursor can be placed by pressing the left
mouse button.
This works by sending the number of cursor keycodes needed to get to the
destination.

.TP
\fBRight click action\fP (RightClickAction=0)
Action to take when the right mouse button is pressed.
If this is set to \fBPaste\fP, the middle button extends the selection region.

\- \fBPaste\fP (1): Paste the clipboard contents.
.br
\- \fBExtend\fP (2): Extend the selected region.
.br
\- \fBShow menu\fP (0): Show the context menu.

.TP
\fBDefault click target\fP (ClicksTargetApp=1)
This applies to application mouse mode, i.e. when the application activates
xterm-style mouse reporting.
In that mode, mouse clicks can be sent either to the application to process
as it sees fit, or to the window for the usual actions such as select and paste.

\- \fBWindow\fP (0)
.br
\- \fBApplication\fP (1)

.TP
\fBModifier key for overriding default\fP (ClickTargetMod=1)
The modifier key selected here can be used to override the click target in
application mouse mode.
With the default settings, clicks are sent to the application and Shift needs
to be held to trigger window actions instead.

The \fBOff\fP setting disables overriding.

\- \fBShift\fP (1)
.br
\- \fBCtrl\fP (4)
.br
\- \fBAlt\fP (2)
.br
\- \fBOff\fP (0)


.SS Window
Window properties.

.TP
\fBColumns\fP (Columns=80)
Default width of the window, in character cells.

.TP
\fBRows\fP (Rows=24)
Default height of the window, in character cells.

.TP
\fBCurrent size\fP
Pressing this button sets the default width and height to the window's
current size.

.TP
\fBScrollback lines\fP (ScrollbackLines=10000)
The maximum number of lines to keep in the scrollback buffer.

.TP
\fBScrollbar\fP (Scrollbar=1)
The scrollbar can be shown on either side of the window or just hidden.
By default, it is shown on the right-hand side.

\- \fBLeft\fP (-1)
.br
\- \fBNone\fP (0)
.br
\- \fBRight\fP (1)

.TP
\fBAsk for exit confirmation\fP (ConfirmExit=1)
If enabled, ask for confirmation when the close button or \fIAlt+F4\fP is 
pressed and the command invoked by mintty still has child processes.
This is intended to help avoid closing programs accidentally.


.SS Terminal
Terminal emulation settings.

.TP
\fBType\fP (Term=xterm)
The terminal type.  This determines the setting of the TERM environment variable
at mintty startup.
Choices available from the dropdown list are \fBxterm\fP, \fBxterm-256color\fP,
\fBxterm-vt220\fP, \fBvt220\fP, and \fBvt100\fP.

If the setting contains "vt220", xterm VT220-style function key mode is enabled
instead of the default PC-style function key mode.
(This can otherwise be set with the DECSET 1061 control sequence.)

Apart from that, this setting has no effect on mintty's terminal emulation,
i.e. all the features are always available. However, the TERM setting does tell
applications what features they can use.

The \fBxterm-256color\fP setting enables 256-color mode in some applications,
but may not be recognised at all by others, which is why plain \fBxterm\fP
is the default.

.TP
\fBAnswerback\fP (Answerback=)

The answerback string is sent in response to the \fB^E\fP (ENQ) character.
By default, this is empty.

.TP
\fBBell\fP
The three checkboxes here determine what effects the bell character \fB^G\fP
has.  Only taskbar highlighting is enabled by default.

\- \fBSound\fP (BellSound=0): Play the system's default beep sound.

\- \fBFlash\fP (BellFlash=0): Briefly invert the foreground and background
colours.

\- \fBTaskbar highlight\fP (BellTaskbar=1): Change the colour of the taskbar
entry if the mintty window is not active.

.TP
\fBPrinter\fP (Printer=)
The ANSI standard defines control sequences for sending text to a printer,
which are used by some terminal applications such as the mail reader
\fBpine\fP.
The Windows printer to send such text to can be selected here.
By default, printing is disabled.


.SS Hidden
The following settings do not appear in the options dialog, i.e. they can
only be set in config files or using the \fB--option\fP command line option.

.TP
\fBWord selection characters\fP (WordChars=)
By default, this string setting is empty, in which case double-click word
selection uses the default algorithm that is geared towards picking out
filenames and URLs.

If a string is specified here, word selection only picks out characters in the
string along with alphanumeric characters.  For example, specifying just the
underscore character (WordChars=_) would allow selecting identifiers in many
programming languages.

.TP
\fBUse system colours\fP (UseSystemColours=0)
If this is set to a non-zero value, the Windows-wide colour settings are used
instead of the foreground, background, and cursor colours chosen on the Looks
page of the options dialog.

.TP
\fBIME cursor colour\fP (IMECursorColour=)
The cursor colour can be set to change when the Input Method Editor (IME) for
entering characters not available directly on the keyboard is active.
The setting is a RGB triplet such as 255,0,0 for bright red.

By default, this is unset, which means that the cursor colour does not change.
The colour can also be changed using xterm's OSC 4 control sequence with
colour number 262.

.TP
\fBANSI colours\fP
These are the 16 ANSI colour settings along with their default values:

\- \fBBlack\fP=0,0,0
.br
\- \fBRed\fP=191,0,0
.br
\- \fBGreen\fP=0,191,0
.br
\- \fBYellow\fP=191,191,0
.br
\- \fBBlue\fP=0,0,191
.br
\- \fBMagenta\fP=191,0,191
.br
\- \fBCyan\fP=0,191,191
.br
\- \fBWhite\fP=191,191,191
.br
\- \fBBoldBlack\fP=64,64,64
.br
\- \fBBoldRed\fP=255,64,64
.br
\- \fBBoldGreen\fP=64,255,64
.br
\- \fBBoldYellow\fP=255,255,64
.br
\- \fBBoldBlue\fP=64,64,255
.br
\- \fBBoldMagenta\fP=255,64,255
.br
\- \fBBoldCyan\fP=64,255,255
.br
\- \fBBoldWhite\fP=255,255,255


.SH LIMITATIONS

.SS Console issue

Mintty is not a full replacement for the Windows console window that Cygwin
uses by default.
Like xterm and rxvt, mintty communicates with the child process through a
pseudo terminal device, which Cygwin emulates using Windows pipes.
This means that native Windows command line programs started in mintty see
a pipe rather than a console device.
As a consequence, such programs often disable interactive input. Also,
direct calls to low-level Win32 console functions will fail.
Programs that access the console as a file should be fine though.


.SS Termcap/terminfo

Mintty does not have its own \fItermcap\fP or \fIterminfo\fP entries;
instead, it simply pretends to be an xterm.


.SS Missing xterm features

Mintty is nowhere near as configurable as xterm.  Of xterm's keyboard modes,
only the default PC-style and VT220-style are available.  8-bit control
characters are not supported, nor are ISO2022 character sets.  There is no
Tektronix 4014 emulation.  Mouse highlighting mode is not implemeted.

The majority of xterm's many control sequences is implemented, but quite a few
are missing.  Significant omissions should be reported as bugs.


.SH SEE ALSO

Additional information can be found on the wiki on the mintty project page,
for example:

\- Keycodes: \fIhttp://code.google.com/p/mintty/wiki/Keycodes\fP
.br
\- Control sequences: \fIhttp://code.google.com/p/mintty/wiki/CtrlSeqs\fP
.br
\- Tips: \fIhttp://code.google.com/p/mintty/wiki/Tips\fP
.br
\- Contributors: \fIhttp://code.google.com/p/mintty/wiki/Credits\fP


.SH LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2010 Andy Koppe.

Mintty is released under the terms of the the \fIGNU General Public License\fP
version 3 or later.
See \fIhttp://gnu.org/licenses/gpl/html\fP for the license text.

There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.


.SH CONTACT

Please report bugs or suggest enhancements via the issue tracker at
\fIhttp://code.google.com/p/mintty/issues\fP.
Questions can be sent to the discussion group at
\fIhttp://groups.google.com/group/mintty-discuss\fP or
the Cygwin mailing list at \fIcygwin@cygwin.com\fP.
