wiki/CtrlSeqs.md, before:



## Introduction ##

Mintty's terminal emulation is aimed at compatibility with 
**[xterm](http://invisible-island.net/xterm/xterm.html)**. 
Most of the xterm control sequences documented at 
http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html are supported. 
Please [report as bugs](https://github.com/mintty/mintty/issues) 
any incompatibilities or unimplemented sequences that would be useful.

Some sequences that were introduced by other terminals such as the 
[Linux console](http://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/online/pages/man4/console_codes.4.html), 
and that aren't available in xterm, are also supported.

This page only lists control sequences that are specific to mintty. 
[Caret notation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caret_notation) is used to show control characters. 
The full details of all supported control sequences are only available in the 
[source code](https://github.com/mintty/mintty/blob/master/src/termout.c).


## Escape keycode ##

There are two settings controlling the keycode sent by the [Esc key](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esc_key).

The first controls application escape key mode, where the escape key sends a keycode that allows applications such as **[vim](http://www.vim.org)** to tell it apart from the escape character appearing at the start of many other keycodes, without resorting to a timeout mechanism.

| **sequence**  | **mode**      | **keycode**    |
|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| `^[[?7727l`   | normal        | `^[` or `^\`   |
| `^[[?7727h`   | application   | `^[O[`         |

When application escape key mode is off, the escape key can be be configured to send `^\` instead of the standard `^[`. This allows the escape key to be used as one of the special keys in the terminal line settings (as set with the **[stty](http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/utilities/stty.html)** utility).

| **sequence**  | **keycode** |
|:--------------|:------------|
| `^[[?7728l`   | `^[`        |
| `^[[?7728h`   | `^\`        |


## Control key codes ##

Application control key mode can be configured per control key.
It facilitates more distinction between different keys, as well as 
usage of Ctrl+[ in various applications that would normally handle 
the ESC character as a generic key code prefix.
Possible distinctions:
  * Esc key and Ctrl+[ key
  * Tab character and Ctrl+I key
  * NUL character sent by Ctrl+space and NUL key code sent by Ctrl+@

As a generic feature, this configuration is accepted for all control 
characters. Generated key codes are similar to those sent in the xterm 
modifyOtherKeys mode, but normalized to a contiguous range of codes using 
capital ASCII character codes, and indicating the control modifier only.
Settings can be combined in a common sequence like `^[[?77009;77027h`.
The respective setting is cleared with a corresponding sequence ending with `l`.

| **sequence**  | **input** | **key code** |
|:--------------|:----------|:-------------|
| `^[[?77000h`  | Ctrl+@    | `^[[64;5u`   |
| ...           |           |              |
| `^[[?77009h`  | Ctrl+I    | `^[[73;5u`   |
| ...           |           |              |
| `^[[?77027h`  | Ctrl+[    | `^[[91;5u`   |
| ...           |           |              |
| `^[[?77031h`  | Ctrl+_    | `^[[95;5u`   |


## Shortcut override mode ##

When shortcut override mode is on, all shortcut key combinations are sent to the application instead of triggering window commands.

| **sequence**  | **override** |
|:--------------|:-------------|
| `^[[?7783l`   | off          |
| `^[[?7783h`   | on           |


## Bidirectional rendering ##

Mintty supports bidi rendering by default. However, some applications 
may prefer to control bidi appearance themselves. There is one option (Bidi) 
and some control sequences to adjust the behaviour.

| **option**  | **bidi**     |
|:------------|:-------------|
| `Bidi=0`    | disabled     |
| `Bidi=1`    | disabled on alternate screen |
| `Bidi=2`    | (default) enabled |

| **sequence**  | **bidi**     |
|:--------------|:-------------|
| `^[[?77096h`  | disabled     |
| `^[[?77096l`  | enabled      |
| `^[[?7796h`   | disabled on current line |
| `^[[?7796l`   | not disabled on current line |
| `^[[8h`       | BDSM (ECMA-48): implicit bidi mode (bidi-enabled lines) |
| `^[[8l`       | BDSM (ECMA-48): explicit bidi mode (bidi-disabled lines) |
| `^[[?2501h`   | enable bidi autodetection (default) |
| `^[[?2501l`   | disable bidi autodetection |
| `^[[1 k`      | SCP (ECMA-48): set lines to LTR paragraph embedding level |
| `^[[2 k`      | SCP (ECMA-48): set lines to RTL paragraph embedding level |
| `^[[0 k`      | SCP (ECMA-48): default direction handling: autodetection with LTR fallback |
| `^[[?2500h`   | enable box mirroring (*) |
| `^[[?2500l`   | disable box mirroring (*) |
| `^[[0 S`      | SPD (ECMA-48): LTR presentation direction |
| `^[[3 S`      | SPD (ECMA-48): RTL presentation direction |

Note: ECMA-48 bidi modes and private bidi modes are experimental.
They follow the current status of the bidi mode model of the 
[«BiDi in Terminal Emulators» recommendation](https://terminal-wg.pages.freedesktop.org/bidi/).

Note: Box mirroring means a number of graphic characters are added to the 
set of bidi-mirrored characters as specified by Unicode.
These are the unsymmetric characters from ranges Box Drawing (U+2500-U+257F) 
and Block Elements (U+2580-U+259F). Others may be added in future versions.

Note: SPD is a deprecated fun feature.


## Scrollbar hiding ##

These sequences can be used to hide or show the scrollbar, whereby the window size remains the same but the number of character columns is changed to account for the width of the scrollbar. If the scrollbar is disabled in the options, it will always remain hidden.

| **sequence**  | **scrollbar** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7766l`   | hide          |
| `^[[?7766h`   | show          |

Note: Mintty also supports the xterm-compatible sequences to hide or show 
the scrollbar, which handle the scrollbar as "outer" to the terminal, 
adding to the window width but keeping the terminal width unchanged 
(except in full-screen mode).


## Application scrollbar ##

— EXPERIMENTAL —

In application scrollbar mode, an application can make use of the window scrollbar;
it can set up the scrollbar to reflect the application idea of a scroll 
position, and receive scrollbar events as control sequences.

This mode is up to future revision. It is currently enabled or disabled 
implicitly, there is no explicit mode setting sequence.

The application scrollbar indicates a scrollbar view within an assumed span 
of a virtual document (as maintained by the application). The height of the 
view always corresponds to the actual terminal size (rows). 
Control sequences can set up the total virtual document size (in assumed lines) 
as well as the view position (from 1 to total size).

| **sequence**            | **scrollbar**                                |
|:------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|
| `^[[`_pos_`;`_size_`#t` | set scrollbar view position and virtual size |
| `^[[`_pos_`#t`          | set scrollbar view position                  |
| `^[[0#t`                | disable application scrollbar                |

Relative scrollbar movement is reported by normal cursor keys (up/down/page),
absolute positioning is reported with special sequences;
for details see 
[Keycodes – Application scrollbar events](https://github.com/mintty/mintty/wiki/Keycodes#application-scrollbar-events).


## Mousewheel reporting ##

Mintty includes support for sending mousewheel events to an application without having to enable full [xterm mouse tracking](http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html#Mouse%20Tracking), which takes over all mouse events and isn't supported by every application.

Mousewheel reporting only happens on the alternate screen, whereas on the primary screen, the mousewheel scrolls the scrollback buffer. The following two sequences enable or disable mousewheel reporting. It is enabled by default.

| **sequence**  | **reporting** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?1007l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?1007h`   | enabled       |
| `^[[?7786l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?7786h`   | enabled       |

The xterm-style sequence mode (1007) is disabled by default but the mintty 
feature (7786) is enabled by default. The mintty mode can be formatted 
to private sequences (see below). To support these subtle differences, 
both can be switched independently.

By default, mousewheel events are reported as cursor key presses, which enables
mousewheel scrolling in applications such as **[less](http://www.greenwoodsoftware.com/less)** without requiring any configuration. Alternatively, mousewheel reporting can be switched to _application mousewheel mode_, where the mousewheel sends its own separate keycodes that allow an application to treat the mousewheel differently from cursor keys:

| **event**   | **code**    |
|:------------|:------------|
| line up     | `^[Oa`      |
| line down   | `^[Ob`      |
| page up     | `^[[1;2a`   |
| page down   | `^[[1;2b`   |

Application mousewheel mode is controlled by these sequences:

| **sequence**  | **mode**      |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7787l`   | cursor        |
| `^[[?7787h`   | application   |


## Ambiguous width reporting ##

Applications can ask to be notified when the width of the so-called [ambiguous width](http://unicode.org/reports/tr11/#Ambiguous) character category changes due to the user changing font.

| **sequence**  | **reporting** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7700l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?7700h`   | enabled       |

When enabled, `^[[1W` is sent when changing to an "ambiguous narrow" font and `^[[2W` is sent when changing to an "ambiguous wide" font.


## Font change reporting ##

Applications can ask to be notified when the font has been changed.

| **sequence**  | **reporting** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7767l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?7767h`   | enabled       |

When enabled, `^[[0W` is sent when the font has changed, 
unless ambiguous width reporting is enabled too, in which case 
either `^[[1W` or `^[[2W` is sent as described above;
so if both reporting modes are enabled, only one report is sent.


## Font glyph coverage enquiry ##

Fonts vary widely in their Unicode coverage, i.e. they usually miss glyphs for many characters. The following sequence can be used to enquire about support for a specified list of characters.

> `^[]7771;?;`_char0_`;`_char1_...`^G`

Characters shall be specified with their decimal Unicode codepoint. Any number of characters can be given. Mintty replies with the same sequence, except that the question mark is replaced with an exclamation mark and that codes for characters that the current font does not have a glyph for are omitted.


## Wide characters ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequences can be used to 
change wide display modes for Indic and a range of long Unicode characters:

| **sequence**           | **wide characters** |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| `^[]77119;1^G`         | Indic               |
| `^[]77119;2^G`         | Long Unicode chars  |
| `^[]77119;0^G`         | none                |

Setting wide Indic mode, Indic characters with glyphs wider than a 
single character cell will be displayed in double-width (like CJK characters).
Note: This is a switchable option only as there is no authoritative 
source of information about which Indic characters should be considered wide;
most screen applications will not cooperate with this feature as their 
assumption of character widths is mostly based on the system locale 
(with the notable exception of the Unicode editor MinEd which supports 
Indic wide display in its forthcoming release).

Setting wide long Unicode characters mode, a number of Unicode characters 
that are supposed to be "wide" or "long" will be displayed 
in double-width (like CJK characters).
See comment above about cooperating applications.
The list of long Unicode characters considered "wide" is 
U+2001, U+2003, U+2014, U+27DD..U+27DE, U+27F5..U+27FF, 
U+2910, U+296A..U+296D, U+2B33, U+2E0E..U+2E11, U+2E3A..U+2E3B;
this list is subject to change in future versions.


## Font size ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequences can be used to change and query font size:

| **sequence**           | **font size**       |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| `^[]7770;?^G`          | query               |
| `^[]7770;`_num_`^G`    | set to _num_        |
| `^[]7770;+`_num_`^G`   | increase by _num_   |
| `^[]7770;-`_num_`^G`   | decrease by _num_   |
| `^[]7770;^G`           | default             |

As usual, OSC sequences can also be terminated with `^[\` (_ST_, the string terminator) instead of `^G`.
When the font size is queried, a sequence that would restore the current size is sent, terminated with _ST_: `^[]7770;`_num_`^[\`.


## Font and window size ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequences can be used to change and query font size:

| **sequence**           | **font size**       |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| `^[]7777;?^G`          | query               |
| `^[]7777;`_num_`^G`    | set to _num_        |
| `^[]7777;+`_num_`^G`   | increase by _num_   |
| `^[]7777;-`_num_`^G`   | decrease by _num_   |
| `^[]7777;^G`           | default             |

The window size is adapted to zoom with the font size, so the terminal character geometry is kept if possible.
As usual, OSC sequences can also be terminated with `^[\` (_ST_, the string terminator) instead of `^G`.
When the font size is queried, a sequence that would restore the current size is sent, terminated with _ST_: `^[]7777;`_num_`^[\`.


## Locale ##

The locale and charset used by the terminal can be queried or changed using
these _OSC_ sequences introduced by **[rxvt-unicode](http://software.schmorp.de/pkg/rxvt-unicode.html)**:

| **sequence**         | **locale**       |
|:---------------------|:-----------------|
| `^[]701;?^G`         | query            |
| `^[]701;`_loc_`^G`   | set to _loc_     |
| `^[]701;^G`          | set to default   |

The locale string used here should take the same format as in the locale environment variables such as _LANG_. When the locale is queried, a sequence that would set the current locale is sent, e.g. `^[]701;C.UTF-8^G`. An empty _loc_ string selects the locale configured in the options or the environment.

Note: While the terminal character set defines how the terminal interprets 
and handles keys and characters, application handling of characters is 
usually determined by the locale environment, and they cannot automatically 
be tied to each other. If they do not match, character handling will be chaotic.
Consistent changing could be achieved with a shell script like 
**[changecs](change-charset.sh)**, 
to be declared in your shell profile (e.g. `$HOME/.bashrc`).


## Window title copy ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to copy 
the window title to the Windows clipboard (like menu function "Copy Title"):

> `^[]7721;1^G`


## Window title set ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
set the window title (alternatively to OSC 2):

> `^[]l;1^G`


## Window icon ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
set the window icon from the given file and optional icon index:

> `^[]I;icon_file,index^G`


## Working directory ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
inform mintty about the current working directory (as used in the Mac terminal), 
in order to spawn a new (cloned) terminal window in that directory 
(e.g. Alt+F2):

> `^[]7;`_file-URL_`^G`

The _file-URL_ liberally follows a `file:` URL scheme; examples are
  * `file:///home/tmp`
  * `//localhost/home/tmp`
  * `/home/tmp`
  * _(empty)_ to restore the default behaviour


## Hyperlinks ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
set a hyperlink attribute which is opened on Ctrl-click.

| `^[]8;;`_URL_`^G` | underlay text with the hyperlink |
| `^[]8;;^G` | clear hyperlink attribute (terminate hyperlink) |
| `^[]8;id=`ID`;`_URL_`^G` | associate instances of hyperlink |

A typical hyperlinked text would be written like
> `^[]8;;`_URL_`^G`text`^[]8;;^G`

Using the `id=` option, multiple parts of hyperlinked text can be 
associated to a single hyperlink, so a partially visible or wrapped 
hyperlinked text can be produced on the screen.
See [Hyperlinks (a.k.a. HTML-like anchors) in terminal emulators](https://gist.github.com/egmontkob/eb114294efbcd5adb1944c9f3cb5feda#viewers-editors)
for an example and a discussion.


## Scroll markers ##

The following sequence can be used to mark prompt lines in support of 
two features:
  * Shift+cursor-left/right navigates to the previous/next prompt line and scrolls in the scrollback buffer accordingly
  * user-defined commands can refer to environment variable MINED_OUTPUT which contains terminal output as limited by previous marker

| `^[[?7711h`   | mark prompt line (last line in case of multi-line prompt) |
| `^[[?7711l`   | mark secondary prompt line (upper lines) |


## Sixel graphics end position ##

After output of a sixel image in sixel scrolling mode, 
the final cursor position can be next to the right bottom of the image, 
below the left bottom of the image (default), or at the line beginning 
below the image (like xterm). The mintty private sequence 7730 chooses 
between the latter two options and is overridden by the xterm 
control sequence 8452.

| **sequence**  | **exit position**    |
|:--------------|:---------------------|
| `^[[?7730h`   | line beginning below |
| `^[[?7730l`   | below left bottom    |
| `^[[?8452h`   | next to right bottom |
| `^[[?8452l`   | below image          |


## Cursor style ##

The VT510 _[DECSCUSR](http://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/DECSCUSR)_ sequence 
can be used to control cursor shape and blinking.
It takes an optional second parameter (proprietary extension) to set the 
blinking interval in milliseconds.

> `^[ [` _arg_ _SP_ `q`
> `^[ [` _arg_ `;` _arg_ _SP_ `q`

| **arg** | **shape**    | **blink** |
|:--------|:-------------|:----------|
| **0**   | default      | default   |
| **1**   | block        | yes       |
| **2**   | block        | no        |
| **3**   | underscore   | yes       |
| **4**   | underscore   | no        |
| **5**   | line         | yes       |
| **6**   | line         | no        |

Commit message:

control sequence to switch IME status (#888, Tera Term)

wiki/CtrlSeqs.md, after:



## Introduction ##

Mintty's terminal emulation is aimed at compatibility with 
**[xterm](http://invisible-island.net/xterm/xterm.html)**. 
Most of the xterm control sequences documented at 
http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html are supported. 
Please [report as bugs](https://github.com/mintty/mintty/issues) 
any incompatibilities or unimplemented sequences that would be useful.

Some sequences that were introduced by other terminals such as the 
[Linux console](http://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/online/pages/man4/console_codes.4.html), 
and that aren't available in xterm, are also supported.

This page only lists control sequences that are specific to mintty. 
[Caret notation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caret_notation) is used to show control characters. 
The full details of all supported control sequences are only available in the 
[source code](https://github.com/mintty/mintty/blob/master/src/termout.c).


## Escape keycode ##

There are two settings controlling the keycode sent by the [Esc key](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esc_key).

The first controls application escape key mode, where the escape key sends a keycode that allows applications such as **[vim](http://www.vim.org)** to tell it apart from the escape character appearing at the start of many other keycodes, without resorting to a timeout mechanism.

| **sequence**  | **mode**      | **keycode**    |
|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| `^[[?7727l`   | normal        | `^[` or `^\`   |
| `^[[?7727h`   | application   | `^[O[`         |

When application escape key mode is off, the escape key can be be configured to send `^\` instead of the standard `^[`. This allows the escape key to be used as one of the special keys in the terminal line settings (as set with the **[stty](http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/utilities/stty.html)** utility).

| **sequence**  | **keycode** |
|:--------------|:------------|
| `^[[?7728l`   | `^[`        |
| `^[[?7728h`   | `^\`        |


## Control key codes ##

Application control key mode can be configured per control key.
It facilitates more distinction between different keys, as well as 
usage of Ctrl+[ in various applications that would normally handle 
the ESC character as a generic key code prefix.
Possible distinctions:
  * Esc key and Ctrl+[ key
  * Tab character and Ctrl+I key
  * NUL character sent by Ctrl+space and NUL key code sent by Ctrl+@

As a generic feature, this configuration is accepted for all control 
characters. Generated key codes are similar to those sent in the xterm 
modifyOtherKeys mode, but normalized to a contiguous range of codes using 
capital ASCII character codes, and indicating the control modifier only.
Settings can be combined in a common sequence like `^[[?77009;77027h`.
The respective setting is cleared with a corresponding sequence ending with `l`.

| **sequence**  | **input** | **key code** |
|:--------------|:----------|:-------------|
| `^[[?77000h`  | Ctrl+@    | `^[[64;5u`   |
| ...           |           |              |
| `^[[?77009h`  | Ctrl+I    | `^[[73;5u`   |
| ...           |           |              |
| `^[[?77027h`  | Ctrl+[    | `^[[91;5u`   |
| ...           |           |              |
| `^[[?77031h`  | Ctrl+_    | `^[[95;5u`   |


## Input method ##

Mintty allows to set, save or restore the IME status explicitly, to support 
applications like text editors to adapt it to the current input target.

| **sequence**  | **IME status**                            |
|:--------------|:------------------------------------------|
| `^[[<`_on_`t` | Open (1) or Close (0, default) IME status |
| `^[[<s`       | Save (push) IME status                    |
| `^[[<r`       | Restore (pop) IME status                  |


## Shortcut override mode ##

When shortcut override mode is on, all shortcut key combinations are sent to the application instead of triggering window commands.

| **sequence**  | **override** |
|:--------------|:-------------|
| `^[[?7783l`   | off          |
| `^[[?7783h`   | on           |


## Bidirectional rendering ##

Mintty supports bidi rendering by default. However, some applications 
may prefer to control bidi appearance themselves. There is one option (Bidi) 
and some control sequences to adjust the behaviour.

| **option**  | **bidi**     |
|:------------|:-------------|
| `Bidi=0`    | disabled     |
| `Bidi=1`    | disabled on alternate screen |
| `Bidi=2`    | (default) enabled |

| **sequence**  | **bidi**     |
|:--------------|:-------------|
| `^[[?77096h`  | disabled     |
| `^[[?77096l`  | enabled      |
| `^[[?7796h`   | disabled on current line |
| `^[[?7796l`   | not disabled on current line |
| `^[[8h`       | BDSM (ECMA-48): implicit bidi mode (bidi-enabled lines) |
| `^[[8l`       | BDSM (ECMA-48): explicit bidi mode (bidi-disabled lines) |
| `^[[?2501h`   | enable bidi autodetection (default) |
| `^[[?2501l`   | disable bidi autodetection |
| `^[[1 k`      | SCP (ECMA-48): set lines to LTR paragraph embedding level |
| `^[[2 k`      | SCP (ECMA-48): set lines to RTL paragraph embedding level |
| `^[[0 k`      | SCP (ECMA-48): default direction handling: autodetection with LTR fallback |
| `^[[?2500h`   | enable box mirroring (*) |
| `^[[?2500l`   | disable box mirroring (*) |
| `^[[0 S`      | SPD (ECMA-48): LTR presentation direction |
| `^[[3 S`      | SPD (ECMA-48): RTL presentation direction |

Note: ECMA-48 bidi modes and private bidi modes are experimental.
They follow the current status of the bidi mode model of the 
[«BiDi in Terminal Emulators» recommendation](https://terminal-wg.pages.freedesktop.org/bidi/).

Note: Box mirroring means a number of graphic characters are added to the 
set of bidi-mirrored characters as specified by Unicode.
These are the unsymmetric characters from ranges Box Drawing (U+2500-U+257F) 
and Block Elements (U+2580-U+259F). Others may be added in future versions.

Note: SPD is a deprecated fun feature.


## Scrollbar hiding ##

These sequences can be used to hide or show the scrollbar, whereby the window size remains the same but the number of character columns is changed to account for the width of the scrollbar. If the scrollbar is disabled in the options, it will always remain hidden.

| **sequence**  | **scrollbar** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7766l`   | hide          |
| `^[[?7766h`   | show          |

Note: Mintty also supports the xterm-compatible sequences to hide or show 
the scrollbar, which handle the scrollbar as "outer" to the terminal, 
adding to the window width but keeping the terminal width unchanged 
(except in full-screen mode).


## Application scrollbar ##

— EXPERIMENTAL —

In application scrollbar mode, an application can make use of the window scrollbar;
it can set up the scrollbar to reflect the application idea of a scroll 
position, and receive scrollbar events as control sequences.

This mode is up to future revision. It is currently enabled or disabled 
implicitly, there is no explicit mode setting sequence.

The application scrollbar indicates a scrollbar view within an assumed span 
of a virtual document (as maintained by the application). The height of the 
view always corresponds to the actual terminal size (rows). 
Control sequences can set up the total virtual document size (in assumed lines) 
as well as the view position (from 1 to total size).

| **sequence**            | **scrollbar**                                |
|:------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|
| `^[[`_pos_`;`_size_`#t` | set scrollbar view position and virtual size |
| `^[[`_pos_`#t`          | set scrollbar view position                  |
| `^[[0#t`                | disable application scrollbar                |

Relative scrollbar movement is reported by normal cursor keys (up/down/page),
absolute positioning is reported with special sequences;
for details see 
[Keycodes – Application scrollbar events](https://github.com/mintty/mintty/wiki/Keycodes#application-scrollbar-events).


## Mousewheel reporting ##

Mintty includes support for sending mousewheel events to an application without having to enable full [xterm mouse tracking](http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html#Mouse%20Tracking), which takes over all mouse events and isn't supported by every application.

Mousewheel reporting only happens on the alternate screen, whereas on the primary screen, the mousewheel scrolls the scrollback buffer. The following two sequences enable or disable mousewheel reporting. It is enabled by default.

| **sequence**  | **reporting** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?1007l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?1007h`   | enabled       |
| `^[[?7786l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?7786h`   | enabled       |

The xterm-style sequence mode (1007) is disabled by default but the mintty 
feature (7786) is enabled by default. The mintty mode can be formatted 
to private sequences (see below). To support these subtle differences, 
both can be switched independently.

By default, mousewheel events are reported as cursor key presses, which enables
mousewheel scrolling in applications such as **[less](http://www.greenwoodsoftware.com/less)** without requiring any configuration. Alternatively, mousewheel reporting can be switched to _application mousewheel mode_, where the mousewheel sends its own separate keycodes that allow an application to treat the mousewheel differently from cursor keys:

| **event**   | **code**    |
|:------------|:------------|
| line up     | `^[Oa`      |
| line down   | `^[Ob`      |
| page up     | `^[[1;2a`   |
| page down   | `^[[1;2b`   |

Application mousewheel mode is controlled by these sequences:

| **sequence**  | **mode**      |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7787l`   | cursor        |
| `^[[?7787h`   | application   |


## Ambiguous width reporting ##

Applications can ask to be notified when the width of the so-called [ambiguous width](http://unicode.org/reports/tr11/#Ambiguous) character category changes due to the user changing font.

| **sequence**  | **reporting** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7700l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?7700h`   | enabled       |

When enabled, `^[[1W` is sent when changing to an "ambiguous narrow" font and `^[[2W` is sent when changing to an "ambiguous wide" font.


## Font change reporting ##

Applications can ask to be notified when the font has been changed.

| **sequence**  | **reporting** |
|:--------------|:--------------|
| `^[[?7767l`   | disabled      |
| `^[[?7767h`   | enabled       |

When enabled, `^[[0W` is sent when the font has changed, 
unless ambiguous width reporting is enabled too, in which case 
either `^[[1W` or `^[[2W` is sent as described above;
so if both reporting modes are enabled, only one report is sent.


## Font glyph coverage enquiry ##

Fonts vary widely in their Unicode coverage, i.e. they usually miss glyphs for many characters. The following sequence can be used to enquire about support for a specified list of characters.

> `^[]7771;?;`_char0_`;`_char1_...`^G`

Characters shall be specified with their decimal Unicode codepoint. Any number of characters can be given. Mintty replies with the same sequence, except that the question mark is replaced with an exclamation mark and that codes for characters that the current font does not have a glyph for are omitted.


## Wide characters ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequences can be used to 
change wide display modes for Indic and a range of long Unicode characters:

| **sequence**           | **wide characters** |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| `^[]77119;1^G`         | Indic               |
| `^[]77119;2^G`         | Long Unicode chars  |
| `^[]77119;0^G`         | none                |

Setting wide Indic mode, Indic characters with glyphs wider than a 
single character cell will be displayed in double-width (like CJK characters).
Note: This is a switchable option only as there is no authoritative 
source of information about which Indic characters should be considered wide;
most screen applications will not cooperate with this feature as their 
assumption of character widths is mostly based on the system locale 
(with the notable exception of the Unicode editor MinEd which supports 
Indic wide display in its forthcoming release).

Setting wide long Unicode characters mode, a number of Unicode characters 
that are supposed to be "wide" or "long" will be displayed 
in double-width (like CJK characters).
See comment above about cooperating applications.
The list of long Unicode characters considered "wide" is 
U+2001, U+2003, U+2014, U+27DD..U+27DE, U+27F5..U+27FF, 
U+2910, U+296A..U+296D, U+2B33, U+2E0E..U+2E11, U+2E3A..U+2E3B;
this list is subject to change in future versions.


## Font size ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequences can be used to change and query font size:

| **sequence**           | **font size**       |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| `^[]7770;?^G`          | query               |
| `^[]7770;`_num_`^G`    | set to _num_        |
| `^[]7770;+`_num_`^G`   | increase by _num_   |
| `^[]7770;-`_num_`^G`   | decrease by _num_   |
| `^[]7770;^G`           | default             |

As usual, OSC sequences can also be terminated with `^[\` (_ST_, the string terminator) instead of `^G`.
When the font size is queried, a sequence that would restore the current size is sent, terminated with _ST_: `^[]7770;`_num_`^[\`.


## Font and window size ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequences can be used to change and query font size:

| **sequence**           | **font size**       |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| `^[]7777;?^G`          | query               |
| `^[]7777;`_num_`^G`    | set to _num_        |
| `^[]7777;+`_num_`^G`   | increase by _num_   |
| `^[]7777;-`_num_`^G`   | decrease by _num_   |
| `^[]7777;^G`           | default             |

The window size is adapted to zoom with the font size, so the terminal character geometry is kept if possible.
As usual, OSC sequences can also be terminated with `^[\` (_ST_, the string terminator) instead of `^G`.
When the font size is queried, a sequence that would restore the current size is sent, terminated with _ST_: `^[]7777;`_num_`^[\`.


## Locale ##

The locale and charset used by the terminal can be queried or changed using
these _OSC_ sequences introduced by **[rxvt-unicode](http://software.schmorp.de/pkg/rxvt-unicode.html)**:

| **sequence**         | **locale**       |
|:---------------------|:-----------------|
| `^[]701;?^G`         | query            |
| `^[]701;`_loc_`^G`   | set to _loc_     |
| `^[]701;^G`          | set to default   |

The locale string used here should take the same format as in the locale environment variables such as _LANG_. When the locale is queried, a sequence that would set the current locale is sent, e.g. `^[]701;C.UTF-8^G`. An empty _loc_ string selects the locale configured in the options or the environment.

Note: While the terminal character set defines how the terminal interprets 
and handles keys and characters, application handling of characters is 
usually determined by the locale environment, and they cannot automatically 
be tied to each other. If they do not match, character handling will be chaotic.
Consistent changing could be achieved with a shell script like 
**[changecs](change-charset.sh)**, 
to be declared in your shell profile (e.g. `$HOME/.bashrc`).


## Window title copy ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to copy 
the window title to the Windows clipboard (like menu function "Copy Title"):

> `^[]7721;1^G`


## Window title set ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
set the window title (alternatively to OSC 2):

> `^[]l;1^G`


## Window icon ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
set the window icon from the given file and optional icon index:

> `^[]I;icon_file,index^G`


## Working directory ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
inform mintty about the current working directory (as used in the Mac terminal), 
in order to spawn a new (cloned) terminal window in that directory 
(e.g. Alt+F2):

> `^[]7;`_file-URL_`^G`

The _file-URL_ liberally follows a `file:` URL scheme; examples are
  * `file:///home/tmp`
  * `//localhost/home/tmp`
  * `/home/tmp`
  * _(empty)_ to restore the default behaviour


## Hyperlinks ##

The following _OSC_ ("operating system command") sequence can be used to 
set a hyperlink attribute which is opened on Ctrl-click.

| `^[]8;;`_URL_`^G` | underlay text with the hyperlink |
| `^[]8;;^G` | clear hyperlink attribute (terminate hyperlink) |
| `^[]8;id=`ID`;`_URL_`^G` | associate instances of hyperlink |

A typical hyperlinked text would be written like
> `^[]8;;`_URL_`^G`text`^[]8;;^G`

Using the `id=` option, multiple parts of hyperlinked text can be 
associated to a single hyperlink, so a partially visible or wrapped 
hyperlinked text can be produced on the screen.
See [Hyperlinks (a.k.a. HTML-like anchors) in terminal emulators](https://gist.github.com/egmontkob/eb114294efbcd5adb1944c9f3cb5feda#viewers-editors)
for an example and a discussion.


## Scroll markers ##

The following sequence can be used to mark prompt lines in support of 
two features:
  * Shift+cursor-left/right navigates to the previous/next prompt line and scrolls in the scrollback buffer accordingly
  * user-defined commands can refer to environment variable MINED_OUTPUT which contains terminal output as limited by previous marker

| `^[[?7711h`   | mark prompt line (last line in case of multi-line prompt) |
| `^[[?7711l`   | mark secondary prompt line (upper lines) |


## Sixel graphics end position ##

After output of a sixel image in sixel scrolling mode, 
the final cursor position can be next to the right bottom of the image, 
below the left bottom of the image (default), or at the line beginning 
below the image (like xterm). The mintty private sequence 7730 chooses 
between the latter two options and is overridden by the xterm 
control sequence 8452.

| **sequence**  | **exit position**    |
|:--------------|:---------------------|
| `^[[?7730h`   | line beginning below |
| `^[[?7730l`   | below left bottom    |
| `^[[?8452h`   | next to right bottom |
| `^[[?8452l`   | below image          |


## Cursor style ##

The VT510 _[DECSCUSR](http://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/DECSCUSR)_ sequence 
can be used to control cursor shape and blinking.
It takes an optional second parameter (proprietary extension) to set the 
blinking interval in milliseconds.

> `^[ [` _arg_ _SP_ `q`
> `^[ [` _arg_ `;` _arg_ _SP_ `q`

| **arg** | **shape**    | **blink** |
|:--------|:-------------|:----------|
| **0**   | default      | default   |
| **1**   | block        | yes       |
| **2**   | block        | no        |
| **3**   | underscore   | yes       |
| **4**   | underscore   | no        |
| **5**   | line         | yes       |
| **6**   | line         | no        |
