.\" MinTTY man page
.\"
.\" This 'man' page is Copyright 2009 (c) Andy Koppe and Lee D. Rothstein
.\"
.\" You may distribute, use, and modify this man page under the terms
.\" of the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), Version 1.3,
.\" 3 November 2008 (or later) as specified.

.\" Turn off Right Justification
.na
.ad l
.\" Turn off Hyphenation
.nh

.TH mintty 1 2009-03-01 0.3.6 Cygwin


.SH NAME

mintty - Cygwin terminal emulator


.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBmintty\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... [ \fB-\fR | \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARG\fR]... ]


.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBMinTTY\fR is a terminal emulator (aka command line window) for Cygwin with
a native Windows user interface and minimalist design.
Its terminal emulation is largely compatible with \fBxterm\fR, but it does not
require an X server to be running.

If a command is supplied on the command line, MinTTY executes that with
any arguments given.
If a single dash is supplied instead of a command,
the current user's default shell (as defined in \fI/etc/passwd\fR) is invoked
as a login shell.
Otherwise, it is invoked as a non-login shell.


.SH OPTIONS

MinTTY understands the standard GNU option formats, with single dashes
introducing short options and double dashes introducing long options,
e.g. \fB-o arg\fR, \fB--option arg\fR, and \fB--option=arg\fR.

.TP
\fB-c\fR, \fB--config\fR=\fIFILENAME\fR
Use the specified configuration file instead of the default \fI~/.minttyrc\fR.

.TP
\fB-p\fR, \fB--pos\fR=\fIX\fB,\fIY\fR
Open the window with its top left corner at the specified coordinates.

.TP
\fB-s\fR, \fB--size\fR=\fICOLS\fB,\fIROWS\fR
Set the number of screen columns and rows, overriding any config file settings.

.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--title\fR=\fITITLE\fR
Use \fITITLE\fR as the initial window title.
By default, the title is set to the executed command.

.TP
\fB-v\fR, \fB--version\fR
Print version information and exit.

.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Display a brief help message and exit.


.SH USAGE

MinTTY aims to adhere to both Windows and Unix conventions, but where they
conflict the Windows conventions take precedence, at least in the default
configuration.


.SS Menu

MinTTY's context menu can be opened by right-clicking the mouse or by pressing
the \fBMenu\fR key that is normally located next to the right \fBCtrl\fR key.


.SS Options dialog

The configuration can be changed in a graphical dialog, which can be opened by
selecting \fBOptions...\fR in MinTTY's context menu or window menu.
(The window menu can be opened by clicking on the program icon or
pressing Alt-Space.)


.SS Copy & paste

As usual in Windows, screen contents can be selected by holding
down the left mouse button and dragging the mouse.
The current selection can be extended by holding down \fBShift\fR or
\fBCtrl\fR while left-clicking.
Double-clicking or triple-clicking selects a whole word or line.

In the default configuration, selected text has to be explicitly copied
to the clipboard using either the \fBCopy\fR menu command, the
\fBCtrl+Insert\fR keyboard shortcut, or the middle mouse button combined
with \fBShift\fR.
The selected region is copied as "rich text" as well as normal text,
which means it can be pasted with colours and formatting into applications
that support it, e.g. word processors.
(See also the \fBCopy on select\fR setting below.)

The clipboard contents can be pasted using either the \fBPaste\fR menu command,
the \fBCtrl+Insert\fR keyboard shortcut, or the middle mouse button.
Not only text but also files and directories can be pasted into MinTTY,
whereby the latter are inserted as quoted filenames.


.SS Drag & drop

Text, files and directories can be also be dragged and dropped into the
MinTTY window.


.SS Fullscreen

Fullscreen mode can be toggled using either the \fBFullscreen\fR command in
the menu or the \fBAlt+Enter\fR keyboard shortcut.


.SS Scrolling

MinTTY has a scrollback buffer that can hold up to 65535 lines.
This can be accessed using the scrollbar, the mouse wheel, or the keyboard.
Hold the \fBShift\fR key while pressing the \fBUp\fR and \fBDown\fR arrow keys
to scroll line-by-line or the \fBPageUp\fR and \fBPageDown\fR keys to scroll
page-by-page.
The modifier key for scrolling can be changed in the options dialog.

Scrolling into the scrollback buffer is not available while the terminal's
"alternate screen" is active.


.SS Mouse tracking

When an application activates mouse tracking, mouse events are sent to the
application rather than processed by MinTTY.
This is indicated by the mouse pointer changing from an I shape to an arrow.
Holding down \fBShift\fR overrides mouse tracking mode and sends mouse
events to MinTTY instead, so that e.g. text can be selected and the menu
can be accessed.
(The modifier key for overriding mouse tracking can be changed in the
options dialog.)


.SS TERM variable

The \fITERM\fR variable for the child process is set to "xterm", so that
programs that pay attention to it expect xterm keycodes and output
xterm-compatible control sequences.


.SH CONFIGURATION

Most MinTTY settings are chosen not through command line arguments but in its
graphical \fIOptions\fR dialog, which can be reached via the context menu or
the window menu.
Settings are stored as in a configuration file, which by
default is located at \fI~/.minttyrc\fR.
It can be overridden with the \fB--config\fR command line option.
Settings are written to the file whenever the \fBOK\fR button is pressed in
the options dialog.

.SS Window
Window properties.

.TP
\fBColumns\fR (Columns=80)
Width of the window in character columns.

.TP
\fBRows\fR (Rows=24)
Height of the window in character rows.

.TP
\fBTransparency\fR (Transparency=0)
Set window transparency level to one of the following choices:

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBOff\fR (0)"
.IP "\- \fBLow\fR (1)"
.IP "\- \fBMedium\fR (2)"
.IP "\- \fBHigh\fR (3)"
.RE

.TP
\fBDisable transparency when active\fR (OpaqueWhenFocused=0)
Make the window opaque when it is active (to avoid background distractions
when working in it).

.TP
\fBDisplay scrollbar\fR (Scrollbar=1)
Show the scrollbar for accessing the scrollback buffer on the right of the
window.

.TP
\fBClose on Alt-F4\fR (CloseOnAltF4=1)
Close the window when Alt-F4 is pressed, otherwise send the corresponding
keycode to the terminal application.


.SS Looks
Settings for changing MinTTY's appearance.

.TP
\fBColours
Clicking on one of the buttons here opens the colour selection dialog.
In the config file colours are represented as comma-separated RGB triples
with decimal 8-bit values (i.e. ranging from 0 to 255).

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBForeground\fR (ForegroundColour=191,191,191)
.IP "\- \fBBackground\fR (BackgroundColour=0,0,0)
.IP "\- \fBCursor\fR (CursorColour=191,191,191)
.RE

.TP
\fBShow bold text as bright\fR (BoldAsBright=1)
If selected, text with the ANSI bold attribute set is displayed with
increased brightness.
Otherwise, it is shown with a bold font, which tends to look better with
black-on-white text.

.TP
\fBAllow text blinking\fR (AllowBlinking=1)
ANSI text blinking can be disabled here, as it can be rather annoying.

.TP
\fBCursor\fR (CursorType=2)
The following cursor types are available:

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBBlock\fR (0)"
.IP "\- \fBLine\fR (2)"
.IP "\- \fBUnderline\fR (1)"
.RE

.TP
\fBEnable cursor blinking\fR (CursorBlinks=1)
If enabled, the cursor blinks at the rate set in Windows' keyboard control
panel.

.SS Font
Settings controlling text display.

.TP
\fBSelect...
Clicking on this button opens the font dialog, where the font and its
properties can be chosen.
In the config file, this corresponds to the following entries:

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBFont\fR (Font=Lucida Console)"
.IP "\- \fBSize\fR (FontHeight=10)"
.IP "\- \fBStyle\fR (FontIsBold=Lucida Console)"
.IP "\- \fBScript\fR (FontCharset=0)"
.RE

.TP
\fBSmoothing\fR (FontQuality=0)
Select the type of font smoothing, if any, from the following choices:

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBSystem Default\fR (0)"
.IP "\- \fBNone\fR (2)"
.IP "\- \fBAntialiased\fR (1)"
.IP "\- \fBClearType\fR (3)"
.RE

.TP
\fBCodepage\fR (Codepage=ISO-8859-1:1998 (Latin-1, West Europe))
The codepage used for encoding input and decoding output.
Select \fBUTF-8\fR for 8-bit Unicode.

.SS Keys
Settings controlling keyboard behaviour.

.TP
\fBBackspace keycode\fR (BackspaceSendsDEL=0)
The character to be sent by the backspace key.
The default is \fB^H\fR, because that is the default across Cygwin,
but ^? (DEL) can be used instead to free up Ctrl-H for other purposes,
e.g. as the help key in Emacs.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fB^H\fR (0)"
.IP "\- \fB^?\fR (1)"
.RE

.TP
\fBEscape keycode\fR (EscapeSendsFS=0)
The character to be sent by the escape key.
The default is the standard escape character \fB^[\fR, but the character
\fB^\(rs\fR can be used instead, thereby allowing the escape key to be used as
one of the special keys in the terminal line settings (see stty(1)).
For example, the escape key can be used instead of Ctrl-C for interrupting
processes, which is impractical with \fB^[\fR, as that is used as the first
character in many multi-character keycodes.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fB^[\fR (0)"
.IP "\- \fB^\(rs\fR (1)"
.RE

.TP
\fBAlt key on its own sends ^[\fR (AltSendsESC=0)
The Alt key pressed on its own can be set to send the escape character
\fB^[\fR.
This can be particularly useful when the escape key is set to send
\fB^\(rs\fR instead.

.TP
\fBModifier key for scrolling\fR (ScrollMod=1)
The modifier key that needs to be pressed together with the arrow up/down
or page up/down keys to scroll the scrollback buffer.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBShift\fR (1)"
.IP "\- \fBCtrl\fR (4)"
.IP "\- \fBAlt\fR (2)"
.RE

.SS Mouse
Settings controlling mouse support.

.TP
\fBRight click action\fR (RightClickAction=0)
Action to take when clicking the right mouse button.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBShow menu\fR (0): Display the context menu
.IP "\- \fBExtend\fR (1): Extend selected region
.IP "\- \fBPaste\fR (2): Paste clipboard contents
.RE

.TP
\fBCopy on select\fR (CopyOnSelect=0)
If enabled, the region selected with the mouse is copied to the clipboard as
soon as the mouse button is released, thus emulating X Window behaviour.
Otherwise, the selected region has to be copied explicitly using the context
menu or the Ctrl-Insert key combination.

.TP
\fBDefault click target\fR (ClickTargetsApp=1)
This applies to application mouse mode, i.e. when the application activates
xterm-style mouse reporting.
In that mode, mouse clicks can be sent either to the application to process,
or to the window for the usual actions: select, extend, paste, show menu.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBApplication\fR (1)
.IP "\- \fBWindow\fR (0)
.RE

.TP
\fBModifier key overriding default\fR (ClickTargetMod=1)
The modifier key selected here can be used to override the default click
target in application mouse mode.
With the default settings, clicks are sent to the application,
and Shift has to be pressed while clicking in order to trigger window actions
instead.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBShift\fR (1)"
.IP "\- \fBCtrl\fR (4)"
.IP "\- \fBAlt\fR (2)"
.RE

.SS Output
Setting for output devices other than the terminal screen.

.TP
\fBPrinter\fR (Printer=)
The ANSI standard defines control sequences for sending text to a printer,
which are used by some terminal applications such as the mail reader pine.
The Windows printer to send such text to can be selected here.

.TP
\fBBell action (BellType=1)
The action to take when the application sends the bell character \fB^G\fR.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBNone\fR (0)"
.IP "\- \fBSystem sound\fR (1)"
.IP "\- \fBFlash window\fR (2)"
.RE


.SH KEYCODES

For alphanumeric and symbol keys MinTTY uses the Windows keyboard layout 
to translate key presses into characters, which means that the keyboard layout
can be switched using the standard Windows mechanisms for that purpose.
AltGr combinations, "dead keys" and input method editors (IMEs) are all
supported.

The Windows keyboard layout yields Unicode codepoints, which are encoded
using the \fBCodepage\fR selected in MinTTY's configuration before sending them
to the application.
(The UTF-8 codepage can be selected for full Unicode input support.)

Should the available keyboard layouts lack required features,
Microsoft's \fBKeyboard Layout Creator\fR (MSKLC), available from
\fIhttp://www.microsoft.com/Globaldev/tools/msklc.mspx\fR,
can be used to create custom keyboard layouts.

For the other keys, MinTTY sends xterm keycodes as described at
\fIhttp://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html\fR, with a few
minor changes and additions.

Caret notation is used to show control characters.
See \fIhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caret_notation\fR for an explanation.


.SS Letter keys

If the Windows keyboard layout does not produce for a letter key press and the
\fBCtrl\fR key is down, MinTTY sends a control character.
This corresponds to the key's "virtual keycode", i.e. \fBVK_A\fR
sends \fB^A\fR, \fBVK_B\fR sends \fB^B\fR, and so on.
For keyboards with Latin scripts the virtual keycodes correspond directly
to the keys' labels, whereas for others, the virtual keys are usually laid
out the same as on the US keyboard.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI    LB    LB
LB    L     L.
Key  #Ctrl #Ctrl+Shift/Alt
A    #^A   #^[^A
B    #^B   #^[^B
...
Z    #^Z   #^[^Z
.TE
.RE

.SS Number and symbol keys

In the same way as for letter keys, the Windows keyboard layout is consulted
first for number and symbol keys. If that comes back empty, and \fBCtrl\fR is
down, the following keycodes are sent.

Unlike xterm, MinTTY ignores VT100 "application keypad mode" for the numpad.
Instead, it relies on the state of \fBNumLock\fR to decide how to handle number
pad keys.
As usual on Windows, when \fBNumLock\fR is off, the number pad keys are treated
as arrow and editing keys, and when it is on, they are treated as number and
symbol keys.
Application keypad codes can still be sent though, by holding down \fBCtrl\fI 
while \fBNumLock\fR is on.

Furthermore, the number keys as well as the comma,
period, plus and minus keys on the main part of the keyboard also send
application keypad codes when pressed simultaneously with\fBCtrl\fR.
This makes those keycodes more accessible to laptop users and more useful
as application shortcuts.

Finally, the keycodes can be modified by holding \fBShift\fR or \fBAlt\fR as
well as \fBCtrl\fR.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI  LB   LB
LB  L    L.
Key#Ctrl#Ctrl+Shift/Alt
*  #^[Oj#^[[j
+  #^[Ok#^[[k
,  #^[Ol#^[[l
-  #^[Om#^[[m
\. #^[On#^[[n
/  #^[Oo#^[[o
0  #^[Op#^[[p
1  #^[Oq#^[[q
\fR...#
9  #^[Oy#^[[y
.TE
.RE

Some of the symbol keys send control characters
when pressed together with \fBCtrl\fR. These are the characters between
\fB^Z\fR (ASCII 26) and space (32). Their positions on the keyboard
hard-coded based on the US keyboard layout.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI    LB    LB
LB    L     L.
Key  #Ctrl #Ctrl+Shift/Alt
[{   #^[   #^[^[
]}   #^]   #^[^]
\(rs|#^\(rs#^[^\(rs
'"   #^^   #^[^^
/?   #^_   #^[^_
.TE
.RE


.SS Control keys

The keys here send the usual control characters, but there are a few
MinTTY-specific additions here that make combinations involving those
characters available as separate keycode.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI        s     LB    LB    LB    LB    LB
LB        L     L     L     L     L     L.
Key            #Shift#Crtl #C+S   #Alt  #A+S
Space    #\fIsp\fR#\fIsp\fR#^@   #^[^@
Enter    #^M   #J    #^^   #^[^^
Tab      #^I   #^[[Z #^[Oz #^[OZ
Back (^H)#^H   #^H   #^?   #^[^?  #^[^H #^[\fIsp\fR
Back (^?)#^?   #^?   #^_   #^[^_  #^[^? #^[\fIsp\fR
Esc (^[) #^[   #^]
Esc (^\(rs)#^\(rs#^]
Pause    #^]   #^[^]
Break    #^\(rs#^[^\(rs
.TE
.RE

The \fBBack\fR and \fBEsc\fR can be configured in the options dialog, so
different keycodes depending on those settings are shown here.

On most keyboards \fBPause\fR and \fBBreak\fR share a key, whereby \fBCtrl\fR
has to be pressed to get the \fBBreak\fR function.


.SS Modifier Keys

The remaining keys all use a common encoding for modifier keys that was
introduced by xterm. When one or more of the following modifier keys are
pressed, they is encoded by adding the associated value to 1.

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBShift\fR: 1
.IP "\- \fBAlt  \fR: 2
.IP "\- \fBCtrl \fR: 4
.RE

For example, Shift+Alt would be encoded as \fB4\fR (i.e. 1+1+2). The modifier
encoding is shown as \fIm\fR in the following sections.


.SS Cursor keys

Cursor keycodes without modifier keys depend on the "application cursor mode",
which is used by fullscreen applications such as editors and pagers. When
one or more modifier keys are pressed, the modifier encoding is added to the
keycodes as shown.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI    s     LB    LB
LB    L     L     L.
Key        #app  #modified
Up   #^[[A #^[OA #^[[1;\fIm\fRA
Down #^[[B #^[OB #^[[1;\fIm\fRB
Right#^[[C #^[OC #^[[1;\fIm\fRC
Left #^[[D #^[OD #^[[1;\fIm\fRD
.TE
.RE


.SS Editing keys

There is no special application mode for the editing keys in the block of six,
but modifier keys can be applied.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI     s     LB
LB     L     L.
Key         #modified
Insert#^[[2~#^[[2;\fIm\fR~
Delete#^[[3~#^[[3;\fIm\fR~
Home  #^[[1~#^[[1;\fIm\fR~
End   #^[[4~#^[[4;\fIm\fR~
PgUp  #^[[5~#^[[5;\fIm\fR~
PgDn  #^[[6~#^[[6;\fIm\fR~
.TE
.RE


.SS Function keys

\fBF1\fR through \fBF4\fR send numpad-style keycodes, because they
emulate the four PF keys above the number pad on the VT100 terminal.
The remaining function keys send codes that were introduced with
the VT220 terminal.

.RS
.TS
tab(#) nospaces;
LI  s      LB
LB  L      L.
Key       #modified
F1 #^[OP  #^[[1;\fIm\fRP
F2 #^[OQ  #^[[1;\fIm\fRQ
F3 #^[OR  #^[[1;\fIm\fRR
F4 #^[OS  #^[[1;\fIm\fRS
F5 #^[[15~#^[[15;\fIm\fR~
F6 #^[[17~#^[[17;\fIm\fR~
F7 #^[[18~#^[[18;\fIm\fR~
F8 #^[[19~#^[[19;\fIm\fR~
F9 #^[[20~#^[[20;\fIm\fR~
F10#^[[21~#^[[21;\fIm\fR~
F11#^[[23~#^[[23;\fIm\fR~
F12#^[[24~#^[[24;\fIm\fR~
.TE
.RE


.SS Mousewheel

In xterm mouse reporting modes, the mousewheel is treated is a pair of mouse
buttons.
However, the mousewheel can also be used for scrolling in applications such as
\fIless\fR that do not support xterm mouse reporting but that do use the
alternatescreen.
Under those circumstances, mousewheel events are
encoded as arrow up/down or page/up down keys, combined with the
\fBModifier key for scrolling\fR as selected on the \fBKeys\fR page of
the options dialog:

.RS
.PD 0
.IP "\- \fBline up\fR:   ^[[1;\fIm\fRA
.IP "\- \fBline down\fR: ^[[1;\fIm\fRB
.IP "\- \fBpage up\fR:   ^[[5;\fIm\fR~
.IP "\- \fBpage down\fR: ^[[6;\fIm\fR~
.RE

The number of line up/down events sent per mousewheel notch depends on
the relevant Windows setting on the \fBWheel\fR tab of the \fBMouse\fR
control panel.
Page up/down codes can be sent by holding down Shift while scrolling.
The Windows wheel setting can also be set to always scroll a whole screen at
a time.


.SH TIPS

A few tips on MinTTY use.


.SS Shortcuts

The mintty Cygwin package installs a shortcut in the Windows start menu
under \fIAll Programs/Cygwin\fR.
It starts mintty with a '-' as its only argument, which tells it to invoke
the user's default shell as a login shell.

Shortcuts are also a convenient way to start MinTTY with additional options
and different commands.
For example, shortcuts for access to remote machines can be created by
invoking \fIssh\fR. 
The command simply needs to be appended to the target field of the shortcut
(in the shortcut's properties):

.RS
Target:  C:\\Cygwin\\bin\\mintty.exe \fBssh server\fR
.RE

The working directory for the session can be set in the "Start In:" field.
(But note that the bash login profile cd's to the user's home directory.)

Another convenient feature of shortcuts is the ability to assign a global
shortcut keys, which allow MinTTY to be invoked easily without using
to the mouse.


.SS Global variables

The standard Cygwin console that is based on the Windows Command Prompt
is invoked from the script \fICygwin.bat\fR, which may include settings
of environment variables, in particular \fIPATH\fR and \fICYGWIN\fR. 
(See http://www.cygwin.com/cygwin-ug-net/using-cygwinenv.html on how to
configure Cygwin using the \fICYGWIN\fR variable.)

Unfortunately Windows shortcuts do not allow the setting of environment
variables, but variables can be set globally in Windows via a button on the
\fBAdvanced\fR tab of the \fBSystem Properties\fR.
Alternatively, global variables can be set using the \fIsetx\fR command
line utility, which comes pre-installed with some versions of Windows
but is also available as part of the free (as in beer) Windows 2003
Resource Kit Tools.


.SS Starting mintty from a batch file

Of course MinTTY can also be started from a batch file.
It needs to be invoked through the \fIstart\fR command though, so as to 
avoid the batch file's console window staying open while MinTTY is running.
For example:

.RS
start mintty -
.RE


.SS Terminal line settings

Terminal line settings can be viewed or changed with the \fBstty\fR utility,
which is installed as part of Cygwin's core utilities package.
Among other things, it can set the control characters used for generating
signals or editing an input line.

See the \fBstty\fR man page for all the details, but here are a few examples.
The commands can be included in shell startup files to make them permanent.

To change the key for deleting a whole word from \fBCtrl+W\fR to
\fBCtrl+Backspace\fR (assuming the \fBBackspace\fR keycode is set to \fB^H\fR):

.RS
.nf
\fC
stty werase '^?'
\fR
.fi
.RE

To use \fBCtrl+Enter\fR instead of \fBCtrl+D\fR for end of file:

.RS
.nf
\fC
stty eof '^^'
\fR
.fi
.RE

To use \fBPause\fR and \fBBreak\fR instead of \fBCtrl+Z\fR and \fBCtrl+C\fR for
suspending or interrupting a process, and to also disable the
stackdump-producing SIGQUIT:

.RS
.nf
\fC
stty susp '^]' swtch '^]' intr '^\' quit '^-'
\fR
.fi
.RE

With these settings, the \fBEsc\fR key can also be used to interrupt
processes by setting the \fBEsc\fR keycode to \fB^\\\fR.
The standard escape character \fB^[\fR cannot be used for that purpose
because it appears as the first character in many other keycodes.


.SS Readline configuration

Keyboard input for the \fBbash\fR shell and other program that use the
\fBreadline\fR library can be be configured through the so-called
\fIinputrc\fR file. Unless overridden by setting the \fIINPUTRC\fR variable,
this is located at \fI~/.inputrc\fR.

It consists of bindings of keycodes to readline commands.
Comments start with a hash character.
The file format is explained fully in the bash manual.

The default inputrc configuration does not support the \fBHome\fR and
\fBEnd\fR keys.
These two lines fix this:

.RS
.nf
\fC
"\e[1~": beginning-of-line
"\e[4~": end-of-line
\fR
.fi
.RE

Anyone used to Windows key combinations for editing text might find the
following bindings useful:

.RS
.nf
\fC
# Ctrl+Left/Right to move by whole words
"\\e[1;5D": backward-word
"\\e[1;5C": forward-word

# Ctrl+Backspace/Delete to delete whole words
"\\d": backward-kill-word
"\\e[3;5~": kill-word

# Ctrl+Shift+Backspace/Delete to delete to start/end of the line
"\\e\\d": backward-kill-line
"\\e[3;6~": kill-line

# Alt-Backspace for undo
"\\e\\b": undo
\fR
.fi
.RE

Finally, a couple of bindings for convenient searching of the command history.
Just enter the first few characters of a previous command and press
\fBCtrl-Up\fR to look it up.

.RS
.nf
\fC
# Ctrl-Up/Down for searching command history
"\\e[1;5A": history-search-backward
"\\e[1;5B": history-search-forward
\fR
.fi
.RE


.SS Less

TODO: .lesskey


.SH LIMITATIONS

.SS Console Issue

MinTTY is not a full replacement for the \fBCygwin\fR console
that is based on the Windows command prompt (\fIcmd.exe\fR).
Like xterm and rxvt, MinTTY communicates with the child process through a
pseudo terminal device, which Cygwin emulates using Windows pipes.
This means that native Windows command line programs started in MinTTY see
a pipe rather than a console device.
As a consequence, interactive input often does not work correctly, and
direct calls to Win32 console functions will fail.
Programs that only output text are usually fine though.


.SS Termcap/terminfo

MinTTY does not have its own \fItermcap\fR or \fIterminfo\fR entry;
instead, it simply pretends to be an xterm.


.SS Missing xterm features

MinTTY is nowhere near as configurable as xterm, and its keycodes
are fixed according to xterm's VT220-style keyboard behaviour (albeit
with a number of MinTTY-specific extensions).
Neither Tektronix 4014 emulation nor mouse highlighting mode are supported.


.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

MinTTY is based on PuTTY version 0.60 by Simon Tatham and contributors,
so big thanks to everyone involved.
Thanks also to KDE's Oxygen team for the program icon.


.SH LICENSE

TODO


.SH CONTACT

Please report bugs or suggest enhancements via the MinTTY issue tracker at
\fIhttp://mintty.googlecode.com/issues\fR. 
Questions can be directed to the MinTTY discussion group at
\fIhttp://groups.google.com/group/mintty-discuss\fR or
the Cygwin mailing list at \fIcygwin@cygwin.com\fR.


.SH AUTHOR

This manual page was written by Andy Koppe with much appreciated help
from Lee D. Rothstein.
